---
id: sample09
title: “BBC Good Food - New York cheesecake"
category: "Recipe"
notes: "A non-fictional recipe"
---
New York cheesecake
4–5 minutes
For the crust

    85g butter

    plus extra for tin
    140g digestive biscuits

    made into fine crumbs (add 2 extra biscuits if you like a thicker base)
    1 tbsp sugar

    granulated or golden caster

For the cheesecake filling

    900g Philadelphia cheese

    or other full-fat soft cheese
    250g golden caster sugar
    3 tbsp plain flour
    1 ½ tsp vanilla extract
    finely grated zest of 1 lemon

    (about 2 tsp)
    1 ½ tsp lemon juice
    3 large eggs

    plus 1 yolk
    284ml carton soured cream

For the soured cream topping

    142ml carton soured cream
    1 tbsp golden caster sugar
    2 tsp lemon juice

Nutrition: per slice (of 12)

    kcal516
    fat36g
    saturates22g
    carbs39g
    sugars30g
    fibre1g
    protein8g
    salt0.87g

Method

    step 1

    Position an oven shelf in the middle of the oven. Heat the oven to 180C/ 160C fan/ gas 4.
    step 2

    Line the base of a 23cm springform cake tin by putting a square piece of parchment paper or foil on top of the tin base and then clipping the side on so the paper or foil is trapped and any excess sticks out of the bottom.
    step 3

    For the crust, melt 85g butter in a medium pan. Stir in 140g digestive biscuit crumbs and 1 tbsp golden caster or granulated sugar so the mixture is evenly moistened.
    step 4

    Press the mixture into the bottom of the pan and bake for 10 minutes. Cool on a wire rack while preparing the filling.
    step 5

    For the filling, increase the oven temperature to fan 220C/ 200C fan/ gas 7. In a table top mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, beat 900g full-fat soft cheese at medium-low speed until creamy, about 2 minutes.
    step 6

    With the mixer on low, gradually add 250g golden caster sugar, then 3 tbsp plain flour and a pinch of salt, scraping down the sides of the bowl and the paddle twice.
    step 7

    Swap the paddle attachment for the whisk. Continue by adding 1½ tsp vanilla extract, 2 tsp lemon zest and 1½ tsp lemon juice. Whisk in 3 large eggs and 1 yolk, one at a time, scraping the bowl and whisk at least twice.
    step 8

    Stir a 284ml carton of soured cream until smooth, then measure 200ml (just over ¾ of the carton). Continue on low speed as you add the measured soured cream (reserve the rest). Whisk to blend, but don't over-beat. The batter should be smooth, light and somewhat airy.
    step 9

    Brush the sides of the springform tin with melted butter and put on a baking sheet. Pour in the filling - if there are any lumps, sink them using a knife - the top should be as smooth as possible. Bake for 10 minutes.
    step 10

    Reduce oven temperature to 110C/ 90C fan/ gas ¼ and bake for 45 minutes more. If you gently shake the tin, the filling should have a slight wobble.
    step 11

    Turn off the oven and open the oven door for a cheesecake that's creamy in the centre, or leave it closed if you prefer a drier texture. Let cool in the oven for 2 hours. The cheesecake may get a slight crack on top as it cools.
    step 12

    Combine the reserved soured cream with a 142ml carton soured cream, 1 tbsp golden caster sugar and 2 tsp lemon juice for the topping. Spread over the cheesecake right to the edges. Cover loosely with foil and refrigerate for at least 8 hours or overnight.
    step 13

    Run a round-bladed knife around the sides of the tin to loosen any stuck edges. Unlock the side, slide the cheesecake off the bottom of the tin onto a plate, then slide the parchment paper out from underneath.

RECIPE TIPS
MIXING THE INGREDIENTS

The way you blend the ingredients is crucial: under-beating can lead to a lumpy mixture, over-beating can whip in too much air. This can result in uneven cooking, bubbles, and cracking.
KEEP EVERYTHING AT ROOM TEMPERATURE

Keep everything at room temperature.

To avoid lumps and ensure even mixing without over-beating, it is essential to have the soft cheese at room temperature before starting. Ideally, let it come to room temperature in its pack for 2 hours. If you're short of time, cut the soft cheese into chunks and leave to soften for 1 hour. It also helps to have a tabletop mixer with a powerful motor. But if you don't have one, a hand-held mixer works fine.

Recipe from Good Food magazine, July 2004
